# Saving and Loading Projects and Media

After you’ve created a project, you’ll want to save it, so that you can
have access to it the next time you use Snap*!*. There are two ways to
do that. You can save a project on your own computer, or you can save it
at the Snap*!* web site. The advantage of saving on the net is that you
have access to your project even if you are using a different computer,
or a mobile device such as a tablet or smartphone. The advantage of
saving on your computer is that you have access to the saved project
while on an airplane or otherwise not on the net. Also, cloud projects
are limited in size, but you can have all the costumes and sounds you
like if you save locally. This is why we have multiple ways to save.

<span id="saveas" class="anchor"></span><img src="assets/chp-03-image487.png"
style="width:3.54861in;height:2.57639in" />In either case, if you choose
“Save as…” from the File menu. You’ll see something like this:

(If you are not logged in to your Snap*!* cloud account, Computer will
be the only usable option.) The text box at the bottom right of the Save
dialog allows you to enter project notes that are saved with the
project.

## Local Storage

Click on Computer and Snap*!*’s Save Project dialog window will be
replaced by your operating system’s standard save window. If your
project has a name, that name will be the default filename if you don’t
give a different name. Another, equivalent way to save to disk is to
choose “Export project” from the File menu.

## <img src="assets/chp-03-image488.png"
style="width:1.23403in;height:2.32986in" />Creating a Cloud Account \index{cloud storage} 

<img src="assets/chp-03-image489.png"
style="width:0.29167in;height:0.16667in" />The other possibility is to
save your project “in the cloud,” \index{save your project in the cloud}
at the Snap*!* web site. In order to do this, you need an account with
us. Click on the Cloud button \index{Cloud button} ( ) in the Tool Bar.
Choose the “Signup…” option. This will show you a window that looks like
the picture at the right.

You must choose a user name \index{user name} that will identify you on
the web site, such as Jens or bh. If you’re a Scratch user, you can use
your Scratch name for Snap*!* too. If you’re a kid, don’t pick a user
name that includes your family name, but first names or initials are
okay. Don’t pick something you’d be embarrassed to have other users (or
your parents) see! If the name you want is already taken, you’ll have to
choose another one. You must also supply a password.

We ask for your month and year of birth; we use this information only to
decide whether to ask for your own email address or your parent’s email
address. (If you’re a kid, you shouldn’t sign up for anything on the
net, not even Snap*!*, without your parent’s knowledge.) We do not store
your birthdate information on our server; it is used on your own
computer only during this initial signup. We do not ask for your *exact*
birthdate, even for this one-time purpose, because that’s an important
piece of personally identifiable information.

When you click OK, an email will be sent to the email address you gave,
asking you to verify (by clicking a link) that it’s really your email
address. We keep your email address on file so that, if you forget your
password, we can send you a password-reset link. We will also email you
if your account is suspended for violation of the Terms of Service. We
do not use your address for any other purpose. You will never receive
marketing emails of any kind through this site, neither from us nor from
third parties. If, nevertheless, you are worried about providing this
information, do a web search for “temporary email.”

Finally, you must read and agree to the Terms of Service \index{Terms of
Service} . A quick summary: Don’t interfere with anyone else’s use of
the web site, and don’t put copyrighted media or personally identifiable
information in projects that you share with other users. And we’re not
responsible if something goes wrong. (Not that we *expect* anything to
go wrong; since Snap*!* runs in JavaScript in your browser, it is
strongly isolated from the rest of your computer. But the lawyers make
us say this.)

## Saving to the Cloud

Once you’ve created your account, you can log into it using the “Login…”
option from the Cloud menu:

<img src="assets/chp-03-image490.png" style="width:1.6875in;height:2.02778in" />Use
the user name and password that you set up earlier. If you check the
“Stay signed in” box, then you will be logged in automatically the next
time you run Snap*!* from the same browser on the same computer. Check
the box if you’re using your own computer and you don’t share it with
siblings. *Don’t* check the box if you’re using a public computer at the
library, at school, etc.

Once logged in, you can choose the “Cloud” option in the “Save Project”
dialog shown on page [37](#saveas). You enter a project name, and
optionally project notes; your project will be saved online and can be
loaded from anywhere with net access. The project notes will be visible
to other users if you publish your project.

## Loading Saved Projects \index{loading saved projects} 

Once you’ve saved a project, you want to be able to load it back into
Snap*!*. There are two ways to do this:

1\. If you saved the project in your online Snap*!* account, choose the
“Open…” option from the File menu. Choose the “Cloud” button, then
select your project from the list in the big text box and click OK, or
choose the “Computer” button to open an operating system open dialog. (A
third button, “Examples,” lets you choose from example projects that we
provide. You can see what each of these projects is about by clicking on
it and reading its project notes.)

2\. If you saved the project as an XML file on your computer, choose
“Import…” from the File menu. This will give you an ordinary browser
file-open window, in which you can navigate to the file as you would in
other software. Alternatively, find the XML file on your desktop, and
just drag it onto the Snap*!* window.

The second technique above also allows you to import media (costumes and
sounds) into a project. Just choose “Import…” and then select a picture
or sound file instead of an XML file.

Snap*!* can also import projects created in BYOB 3.0 or 3.1, or (with
some effort; see our web site) in Scratch 1.4, 2.0 or 3.0. Almost all
such projects work correctly in Snap*!*, apart from a small number of
incompatible blocks.

If you saved projects in an earlier version of Snap*!* using the
“Browser” option, then a Browser button will be shown in the Open dialog
to allow you to retrieve those projects. But you can save them only with
the Computer and Cloud options.

## If you lose your project, do this first!

<img src="assets/chp-02-image384.png" style="width:0.31944in;height:0.18056in"
alt="Macintosh HD:Users:bh:Desktop:Dropbox:manual (1):filebutton.png" />If
you are still in **Snap*!*** and realize that you’ve loaded another
project without saving the one you were working on: ***Don’t edit the
new project.*** From the File menu choose the Restore unsaved project
option \index{Restore unsaved project option} .

Restore unsaved project will also work if you log out of Snap*!* and
later log back in, as long as you don’t edit another project meanwhile.
Snap*!* remembers only the most recent project that you’ve edited (not
just opened, but actually changed in the project editor).

If your project on the cloud is missing, empty, or otherwise broken and
isn’t the one you edited most recently, or if Restore unsaved project
fails: ***Don’t edit the broken project.*** In the Open… box, enter your
project name, then push the Recover button \index{recover button} . *Do
this right away,* because we save only the version before the most
recent, and the latest before today. So don’t keep saving bad versions;
Recover right away. The Recover feature works only on a project version
that you actually saved, so Restore unsaved project is your first choice
if you switch away from a project without saving it.

To help you remember to save your projects, when you’ve edited the
project and haven’t yet saved it, Snap*!* displays a pencil icon to the
left of the project name on the toolbar at the top of the window:

nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn

## Private and Public Projects

By default, a project you save in the cloud is private; only you can see
it. There are two ways to make a project available to others. If you
share a project, you can give your friends a project URL (in your
browser’s URL bar after you open the project) they can use to read it.
If you publish a project, it will appear on the Snap*!* web site, and
the whole world can see it. In any case, nobody other than you can ever
overwrite your project; if others ask to save it, they get their own
copy in their own account.

